We're in Milan at the Salone del Mobile,
the world's largest furniture fair.
4cf2295d6f6e4aff98f6dcb109f033b1
In 2025, there's a lot to see in Milan.
32d91fa90d8944a7ba05970366b493eb
–This is big.
–If you like design, you have to be here.
407f804f85e34b768e2d29106809f25e
Nordic design has conquered the world
for over a hundred years.
6665bf51f2604591995dd7e804e8d0fd
I fell in love right away.
f94dc196f8724031b6c3700c116a5629
All rooms with this: Wow!
6c15965ad30e4f86b6f6c631344950a7
I can't take furniture to heaven.
cfa1fa4b1f904bc18be2b329281385c6
But what exactly makes Nordic design–
61cd85bbad2c439d8358ce66c3bcd25c
–enchant collectors
from all over the world?
e26ce06385224c319856893a464186fb
That wooden chairs and plastic chairs are sold
for fantastic sums internationally.
5ac3484223c6474487531e0ab0984dbb
From modest everyday objects to
immortal cultural icons–
5a725fb87835425f8e6f083de7fc6bbc
–seen in movies
and in the most exclusive homes in the world.
0a6abd731fbe4e308291b57625684962
This is a series
about a hundred years of Nordic design–
799157a629f54c9aaf5d2068ad4379eb
–and why it looks the way it does.
2139d60236d44806b444b3e3cfca880a
There are fairs in London,
Copenhagen, Stockholm and Tokyo–
799c358ef6394847a12c62c8b93248d1
–but always Milan
is the most important venue.
0fbbe62d1d384cefb2bcd05bf8edda3b
At the world's largest design fair
in Milan–
5a5dfa3dafbe499495037f7dd56d27b9
–the latest absolute
in design and form is shown.
b610ecb0f5b14e27904d41c5abb43675
Thousands of exhibitors from
all over the world compete for attention.
1182b7c992f34454a8574f3f17e0a93f
And one of them is the lighting designer
Norwegian Daniel Rybakken.
4a54f8e80c454dfa9aa4ff14d168a830
Milan is the most important fair for me, and where I began my career.
d897f1de95e540d6909dd2e0427a0858
It is where I grew up
as a designer.
11122e8e7fb44f70ac6f2c56b897c2cc
Daniel Rybakken is
one of the designers of the 2000s–
fe92347f071f4d4b9a467707aa0d68eb
–who wants to break
with all previous conventions.
7cfced3bd6234c53bd7f3d93b81b3631
His lamps don't look at all like
how lamps are supposed to look–
05bb57f2d3bf41bcaee68fd5c81f53fd
–but are imitations
of Nordic sunlight.
c84701d28cde43b6a1356f48038f35ce
A Scandinavian or Nordic light–
2160681db7b94224b2e6865f52f09fcc
–that ranges from
very diffuse light to sharp.
377c492ce3f74aa2857f9e0fda19570a
Daniel Rybakken's lamps break
with the formal tradition–
d8bb856a977d4d9b8456691a245841a1
–but also aspire
to the authentic, the natural.
52200a2a8b5e42f3992bb14118bf78f9
And it fits perfectly
with the trends of this year's fair.
fcc0ccf84eea4fe6b2b88ae912e8698a
Some directions become clearer–
2e8a9597b10647b0aaeb291eef6319f1
–like that sustainability is not just
about reusable materials more.
a1929d47b3bb47e3a69b4c95750b518e
Another trend is
that craftsmanship is coming back.
ed1fac022f5948f7bee4fb808489f4e7
We want to be able to feel the surfaces and materials.
84a5673289134d6884ec97d4c4633aec
And see the hand of a person.
ca1d200194684acb9538ee8ff7aa683a
The millennium begins with a catastrophe
that never happened – the millennium bug.
6e59f59febad4c54a1d24c75580e9458
The one that was feared would crash
the world's computers never came.
6727d3acf70c498d925aab6ec41577a8
But to say that the 2000 was
free from catastrophes would be a lie.
704fa026b7294491b9a928383c56dadd
The economic recession
continued for three years.
8bd179a0ff8d4558b05bf621f0ca7ccd
I want you to feel panic.
85fc56f9f8184fef8f0f2b1e8305e659
Act as if your house is on fire.
bc6bb285ec3b4d5d9babb883999723a1
Only time.
e42f437719a044b293d5955032db77b3
...previously protested this year
for a better climate.
5bd845f1e03347cd844283ed3d416e9b
Much snow but still talk
about global warming!
02cc2e8fea9042c79678f753e00d6ed
How can global warming exist
when it's so cold?
5518f27870f94b1db35725669388b287
Designers in the new millennium
must reinvent the craft.
5ffbea87c2904c68a762e2d28bb131e8
Now design can be
a matter–
5ef217e1c12d44999ac914a9fcd88394
–war against conventions–
4e6b512085a74b618204d0869cd7d42c
–or an exploration of new
materials to reduce the climate footprint.
3cfca4ce314847ab85a651f84fa3d9a6
Why else do mushroom chairs arise
in a laboratory in Denmark?
dd9c445813c64d6e82ceef5f867bc876
And what does a metal chair from Iceland say
about the Utøya attack?
37c06354d5f44580b02cc762c420fce5
And why can't Madonna
and other celebrities–
c2bc4c1bf04a44629aa288b88d592a9c
–separate from a Swedish horse lamp?
07c00e31f65c4559a64a3f6d674b64b6
Can we save the world?
058399f2882b407388c70aecba17bf4f
I think it's difficult for humans.
52b74a386a7547f798955f421418998f
We can create the best possible situation,
so that everyone can have a good life.
b3621f1e136341e99a78da4cdc02e0c2
That's what design is.
fa7583c8042643239b6a54ebbf112bf8
In the sea just outside Copenhagen
blows every night–
fe7a3442b545434487c62c30c9a8a622
–an apparently inexhaustible amount
of seaweed towards the shore–
34314cbf6bda49569540327fc7fe6327
–directly towards the studio
of designer Jonas Edvard.
df1708a912da466bb65e9c6975fa68e5
And in his hands
seaweed can become anything.
52dc412f965c4bc0aad722b33fb90e4b
As lighting
over mussels and seaweed–
5c70b8c17ee146d1940686ebe0fa6195
–in one of the
finest restaurants in the North.
c2cf0e0e56954ee9835f4657257ba264
I work with unconventional materials,
but they are natural materials.
4c5adf5c221c406aae390000aa5194cb
I got into this
because I'm interested in–
b02554c4c36c4a1191b5bf61cd9fff95
–how we can create design
from natural materials in our immediate environment.
5ac5916148f24475a7f840d937f94b83
I have found several types of seaweed,
mainly marine algae.
347a4b6390f84667ae854983ae3a2e83
They have bubbles and can float on the surface.
ecdefe87b93944a593bee51d841c8250
They also have sugar seaweed that
grows further away and doesn't float in as often.
91dc737f532f4bb6ad6fb31d18cdcf5c
We have a lot of seaweed.
We have a coastline of 850 miles.
dd2afd7d916a4497859ddfab7b6d54c1
It's a long coastline for the country's size.
7c9dfcd6a6104f8180268f54659cbc39
Seaweed, which in many people's opinion
is useless and smelly–
45eec9492b6445129843f732a8092403
–is for Jonas Edvard
a resistant and untapped material.
3e35591eeb214237a681ae1c0f028a07
And we can harvest and use it.
a597678ee6944b3f80fd141891c55eb7
Seaweed contains a binder
that can bind to paper among other things.
854641abe89b4f308738e4b02836ff9d
It has always been used as a binder.
b52d663438bf4f57810f907d201117c3
But using seaweed
is for Jonas Edvard much more–
42ffffb32fb743dfb41fde0c7c7aca7b
–than working with a natural material,
free and resistant.
d66b84336b6449b2b0377eea29c5beca
It is also an endless story.
3acf3d0fa21f41f8b10e83fadc16634d
This story is not about us–
5d2b82fb541f41c68e00f53b991605c8
–or what I want with my design.
039bc06908834b9fb8430eda719861db
What can it contribute,
and how should we relate?
b913977cf77f409db54d42205cd8ccf6
About our obligation to do the right thing.
45d7a20aaf7a452c8df1fe25926188b7
What can be reused,
recycled or composted?
182202c82504431eaec41f52ef006013
Jonas Edvard grew up in the society
of abundance of the 80s and 90s–
8e9a345b1fe2406e8f8464d10a701081
–when no one talked about sustainability
or limited natural resources.
c800a8dac4d94a5d8d6b1933dc803c53
And he learned to design objects
from already existing materials.
22e42b3b9ebc406e94dc0934376635ac
Now it has become a mass or clay–
d45a83e5d3554aabb78a2e55e82e8020
–that I can now press into a shape.
917ca90bf6554ea8a802b91749b8876a
I have made a mold
into which the material fits.
9112f03cb724402792c7a4d337068a51
All the materials I work with
are interesting in their original form.
1b9237330a54405e8c399ab6686b67b5
I can find them like that.
I can find excavated lime.
8a60c35fac8641fbb1155055c39ddcea
I can find seaweed
and living mushrooms.
f89cb75ab40b453fab33ef6856000d93
From seaweed and mushrooms
Jonas Edvard creates new design.
88fe1a25c6854ca192da1cb773926486
The materials are like a colleague
with a will of their own.
d4d3d745f0664f16bd3ed6e4f94ec285
When I work with mushrooms
I collaborate with something living.
0d0671e18c674d239db07ab585bf4e2c
It is inspiring to have an organism
that manages well on its own.
fa086ec8d6c34624a680bf9c1cc201d9
It is interesting to see how the mycelium
binds and becomes part of itself.
444c41368a844b78940e63d9182ed78b
Jonas Edvard's design has eternal life.
0369755131144eeb95c6de655cb37c31
At least if eternal life
means that furniture and lamps–
5ced15a4d473422caa5381f36aa60954
–when no longer used, can
decompose to their original form.
3d6632cc9d7c40558e135ebf97586911
The mushroom chair that Edvard cultivated would be
disappeared after 60 days–
3cb5063ddf19418a95eca7c421607117
–if left outdoors.
fac45414a98a41ddaa1570479c4e1400
The chair in the museum is fused from mushroom plates.
7a9df2a1c3754ce598062933850fd735
It is made of plates that have grown together.
8f7207b834f246b8aa69440744ad2a73
He was interested in scaling.
925e1997970f49ffa8916c11604c2a2e
Can it be from a very small scale
to something functional?
9202e3a91be3460d80390c2d729cd0c2
It can be sat on,
but it was a larger experiment.
eda48b6bece144ef8696461280a11120
It took a long time and was difficult,
but it worked and was exciting.
54c7e778cce34d1f81ec9e39940993ed
It is uncertain
working with something living.
90c2e29a9c3042e6a7f5e669dc4c5343
Where does it go? Can it grow here?
62667ce80ad9417bbc7766357427d13f
One becomes a farmer, not a designer.
699565cbac084876bec98a6b77ec9932
One becomes an observer and collaborates
with a process one does not control.
76d0c12e62c9402eb9afd6cfa63570e8
I can adjust the air humidity and temperature,
but I don't know where it leads.
45ee372b40034ec38b7ee5ffd365d4b0
The seaweed from the Baltic Sea
is now lamp shades–
2dd7683df60e44f58f500936422f7b78
–illuminating the tables
of the Michelin-starred restaurant Noma in Copenhagen.
6c7b71e2f2814ff497aca370a4555095
When the lamps no longer work,
they become compost for tomato cultivation.
00ec40f03ee64fbaa9e8dd8bf3e0ecd5
We don't save the world,
but we take one day at a time.
0f441f62ba234715afb56160c891cdf1
We won't dominate the world in millions of years, or less–
18852867350a4077a13b267461220443
–so we must do the best we can, now.
0bee2d621fb442888c3f7bc0dafb9d64
The Milan fair has grown considerably
since its inception in the early 60s.
6ed693b721ad4a0583d5a9018723b7b4
The fair is in its 63rd year–
507501960c394893b3287d79a68b9852
–and has more than 2,000 exhibitors
from 37 countries.
f15cbd1b807d4d159a9a7c846762c329
Many Nordic designers have used
Milan as their window to the world.
1b85410855424ad4a80bfe5089eb7032
Nordic design has an interesting role–
a75c89d45180447abc24f54109c1b3c5
–for the fair that began as a national fair
with mostly Italian exhibitors.
57949dc604c94277bbd806178d15bcb4
Then it grew to become a global phenomenon.
713a6f057a214a33a732c2d08aba696f
Italian craftsmanship
has always been appreciated in the North.
b720ed84ebdd43ea9191a860450a1fe7
We have the same respect for materials.
0219da693da544c8b7115a94a8d1d149
Nordic design and Nordic companies–
b82fb061005c4844a879468508928130
–had an important role in making our fair
so international.
c9da6ed4f0104a6fbf1966ebc231c7ce
When we exhibited in Milan
we brought moss and branches–
85b78786b33a4ebdadf7ae5ac5d51134
–and hid the things among what we had
collected from the forest. It looked good.
d674a13bffea4940947d929c3cb4e1df
When you were little the forest was a place
where you built for yourself.
34e8672d96954aaf8d3e20e5c6869a03
You made things. You found something
that looked like a sofa in the forest.
0232f96ace5e455d97375fb54babeb79
You inhabited the forest.
524b683c62f74896b5e9949d583fe308
So you played all day,
and it looked like...
56d2f08b4111447a97fecf655c7f8b36
You could climb something in a tree–
bda5688a43694c10a406ec8ac207c476
–and it became the children's playground
for weeks.
8fbaa7b0b9d24e65b31291dc38824f9
Design by Nature is a project
we've been doing for 7-8 years.
706ea0d4d77f4a96903895f8cae907c2
A research project.
8de214787068432695b3767cf4c4f477
We talk a lot about how it was
when we were little and were in the forest.
0941bfa819824b7999a5736733eca435
You behave in a different way
when you're in the forest.
cfd3c87e138f459da55215f9e89dc9c3
Climbing a rock,
and lying down on the ground.
e33041adeb9d41e9beebd72436a5011b
You get a different movement pattern.
5d7beb3180f947bb9aff671e0adc43a0
We started by going to certain
places we visited many times.
6c31f5732aa74f0cbeaaa3263b675bb0
We came at different times of the year, different
times of the day and in different weather–
bc7d7a14ffd34c91964ab239b3352155
–and documented.
53e793ccf8684a8d888da765d411299d
We painted, drew
and photographed a lot.
ae3d3b4fdaaa49bd9851c288e8f04ac5
And we took different textures
we found in nature.
dfc729b31588413e829a9d86c6a665ba
Then we scanned 3D
large areas and details.
121e042586c34b5ca3547df20ba88a3a
And we could reform
the 3D files we got–
ff36c1af6c3a49949348ce4aeff5aea8
–into large furniture sculptures–
232ec2a4cfca439eb2f88c31f36aa54d
–that we could mill
and make soft furniture.
0939def6ab5843ff816ee9a41cf89921
They have scanned moss, rocks,
plants, lakes, ice and animal tracks.
ab42f06475df4ab29341b76dcd384f09
Front Design mixes 3D technology
with traditional craftsmanship–
b5811c5d5fc8486ca46da014fe8d01bc
–such as plant dyeing,
embroidery and upholstery.
2793d8372b7f48f7ba73e10d43be94a2
These are upholstered pieces
that we have embroidered.
7649bffe6f3643ad8f42449375bd3322
We thought it was fun
to work with many different techniques.
239ebbf2e3c24d9e98a4b58606b2c575
That also had different tactilities
you discover after a while–
053a30adcc604d57afc524c0fbdf4298
–so it becomes a relief in the fabric.
d846da0265174323a542044c33291c80
All the figurative is in the fabric.
It's not printed on the cloth.
ca16550732f54282add5c94196ffce85
It's woven.
e29c0894d7fd43f3a1b4e8c4a825b3d7
We wanted it to feel like if
you had taken a handful of the forest–
b9763cbdba8b4da7aec8a8bc44b88119
–taken a piece of the forest
and brought it home.
b9db53f3e4f543aca634f21d9b01ba9e
Front Design has gone against
the prevailing norms–
d27321e1cd40414e90dec081271f3a95
–since they were founded in the early 2000s
about what design and good taste is.
534f06ec8c964d66a522d83d28b64024
As for example
using figurative language.
e236d4a99c954dc3b24ea6af170b10d8
They had received a commission, a brief:
0754d30a5ee64b7cb79f66fcdff2ac61
"Make a lamp
that my grandmother would also like."
42e378095466476ebce9d95d2c70b4d9
Then it became a horse
with a lamp on its head at 1:1 scale.
0d0a830e6ccf4dee9a1a3cfba0520992
It has been fun to see how people
have reacted to these pieces of furniture.
b12d928eacda4e88b246a0ea8147588c
Some really hated them.
34d34c93a2e743e2bc6ff84b59c33252
–It was so horrible, they thought.
–Yes.
cfebbd614b2f458897e024043c8e687e
It was an offense to make it.
88d4edbcf5e84edaa1599a7fb7c7f234
It was really not allowed
to make things so figurative.
bc82563081c24180bd6d2096f1727124
But it was interesting to see
that people come up and caress it.
0ba9744f87bb414597a055c23846f34c
People sending images
of when they ride the horse.
8d8188562556415890b88cdad10aee9a
Madonna, Usain Bolt and...
20dfef6953484cb2a83c685320373582
Robbie Williams had it
in their wedding photo.
3af88a2a09344efc98501ca940c014d7
Zlatan Ibrahimovic... They have posted
images of themselves with the horse.
7c4058622b174acf891acd1624a5e12a
It lives many different lives.
6571fb7257424279a108dd804587977
Front Design shook the design world
when in their graduation project–
38031c3f84bf4f1098f43932493cf41a
–they let rats gnaw the pattern
into tapestries–
439807c46745477eadf88dfbe2240471
–and snakes form
the everyday object.
dc1fd3bff50545898eb721e22ef8ac65
If animals make the form,
who is then the designer?
7ae8f7193d12490987f48f754a8b6d2d
Design by Animals was completely new
in Nordic design history.
3cf120aae76d4fa687d73ddcbf61998b
The people didn't understand what we were doing,
I think. They wondered.
8e8ae60d8ecf42ce88ec7125fb278100
Is this design? Why then?
9077afe61c1c47399073e2624c63a911
It was quite far from
the prevailing design scene at that time.
e351dc1570b44b9da90f2588911c5d76
This was something
that was more based on a question.
a6204ce4eb8441439e259d74a58cd703
What is design?
Or what is one as a designer?
bb0af77c28ac44a98c35317c4d81892a
What does craftsmanship
mean in the 2000s?
0d6c32be456643e389bd1627c89aa5a
How do we redefine that
in a world of mass production?
9ec2e3ab83134e61a1d24c338141e2e
What does it mean
to make something by hand today?
e957df418c5b4c868fbba94f9cdd6ec5
Have we also used technology?
41b90c8ad5144962978dd1a0eb693299
Is it perhaps a mix?
It's exciting.
31e416570b62478fb8a93e4a9c9cb729
Cecilie Manz's focus
is on the fragility of materials.
d9648b3ba5a84fd394071370baae78b6
The models are of washing paper
in deep tones...
01157ddd9abd4c059973012efe1e3626
Can't you make something people want to buy?
41588378adcd46698f074c80d92898a1
Here we have the Fuck You chair.
22d5db679412426d85db609fdeede365
I'm a lightweight.
cba5f3bee9a2441d8fefef1086517091
One draws the same chair all the time.
7048abc109834899b574d2a664e08a3f
One sees the younger ones designing chairs–
531a88f34568428b8aaae8ea0c338f68
–that could be taken from
some 60s magazine. What's the point?
b811d54f6651437981d81890610a0494
In Scandinavian design
it has been almost like a religion.
874d25528f6a496aaa2017a8f038dce4
It becomes boring in the long run,
I think at least.
ea6fd15eefb54e7aadceb635f3011751
When design has become a religion–
db79b5870f724709bc0bf705cc09fd78
–then it's like light wood.
fc3172b515554a3c9a2fd3c248fcb3ee
Design is not a religion,
it's something to have fun with.
2d6aa0180bd643e6bd34652b0c920447
The design of Icelandic Sigurður Gústafsson–
721767cb35714a2ea0c728c2e29363d2
–is far from traditionally
Nordic design of clean lines.
f1ee047ebcf74327ab1ed9a7a7bf50ef
His works are based
on childhood games in the dump–
7bcff60ddad84e03a37b7f8dc53355b3
–that was close to the childhood home.
455e285602be4f12963c9c5306d4ddcc
As a small child I played a lot among ships.
4756d0510b5b4a12a628e05d8c8b5d98
I lived close to a small harbor
and there were ships everywhere.
645e56fde78a417fab1d6c67368b3ce9
It should be considered as a bad play environment today...
552e6a1b4b724e25a91c372a64d1a8c
I played in the shipyard dump
that still exists in Akureyri.
2b0a1a5717e847aabbfb1c050ff6a419
There I played with all kinds of rubbish.
562664599ab94c7f90d5ee5ccac72771
So arose the name A-Eki.
"A, ekki!" is something you say to children.
4aede7c93d924284a2ff7309d33f442c
"No haga eso!" (Don't do that!)
57386767794f496db99bdbdca60084f6
I never said it to my son,
even though he smeared my things with ice cream.
e76b85df40a046fe9ddbf3ae53cb73f2
My furniture shouldn't be so sensitive.
c10030b389dd49389f552d95c27f915e
I don't understand that furniture
shouldn't be used. What kind of home is that?
ce145c938d284294b2b1fbc70fff51b4
A-Eki is Ikea backwards.
e5341125b8d8484b967e06ea485502ec
In some aspects, some of the chairs
are more sculptures than chairs.
2b8b1674f0c841c88cd35eae150d3305
In my home there are no pictures on the walls.
cd5587ed51fd4e0bb211865901e75ed1
The furniture takes so much attention
that it wouldn't work to have pictures.
8bfdd6c85f6245dfb822d93d51ed485
Sigurður Gústafsson is an architect
trained in Denmark and Norway.
e6bb6bfd087b4a25b3ea0e25234f6e71
The chairs are his way
of playing and relaxing.
64a38cf3655746a6857bb63242cd3d14
That they would succeed
he could never have imagined.
74f43e0f61fe4ff0bca8b837ece9d57c
And then I made the Tango chair.
3eed1f911f254d97af70e552cf4c7c65
Then the cultural section of Jyllands-Posten–
752b0e1e7cc64fe4aaf624e96421c8a0
–covered the entire front page with a photo
of Tango. I was totally blown away.
19af460a5ef441a5a91017af74f5ba42
That a chair
doesn't have to be just a chair–
5495e08f6bf9435e852af9d68820cefe
–but can equally be a thought,
a question or a daydream–
746cfb22d80d4dd2a15e50568ea1962f
–is a red thread in the craft
in the North around the turn of the millennium–
1aa990b916b14f81bb5565461d4b3fe1
–also in Sigurður Gústafsson.
c3b53f36dbd24811abd5f13c4a706f06
I was on vacation in Spain
and my girlfriend was sleeping.
4b3aec59afc94ed6b8c80b63b41b0674
I was watching TV, Clint Eastwood
dubbed into Spanish.
754fb1867b1d48cc9d83f41887818510
I thought: "I'll draw a rocking chair
for Clint Eastwood."
d0c734cbeb0c482f0a826be0d16a1d39
It has to be a cool chair
for such a tough guy. Him and Keith Richards.
8f8e0db477a14a01b2b77903a0439105
So this is a rocking chair
for aging rock stars.
5ed6637a3d3c44f3a15311d602671a4a
It's good for rocking,
it's like a pendulum.
aca593ee50314cfaa6b60835b0f67909
But not all chairs are just play
for Sigurður Gústafsson.
b5814fd3377e490381d1be9e123482b8
This is a chair I made
as a symbol of...
7afe94a872eb4b2288b6a96e9cc2304c
...the Utøya attacks in Norway.
84a0daf5a12341eb926cbf6c56be2e34
This is completely random.
5952d319a83141d1ac73e0b0adc09201
It becomes as it becomes. You take sticks
and put them in slightly different directions.
f1f2903e8d8c469cb9ae6fb7706c3089
They support each other
and then it becomes very strong.
a26230094fb74c4491346cffea5ade82
So the thought here...
77c7ee2a1caa4f8dbd64918e5bb1bc2d
This is what we understand as...
2e9754ca185d4934b41c73bf50afec8c
...the strong, the big buildings we have,
the structure of society.
95618c820a6248acb992718195fc08bc
A bit pretentious for a small chair...
1b51b1998d2f45b5861ceadeee2d04f8
But the strength of society is in the small.
172f7ff3f3a84767a9cf7a80aa11a0d3
What makes us human.
4b64dba26cd2492db4a8365577a68039
Being kind to each other.
d71eaa28f8cd4bb9986eef845e62c8d0
The soft side of the creator.
354cea9d8f684317ab678d1699126c36
The designation what is
Swedish design is so diluted today–
4c0082ffbf5348fea49b85f16a11fa0b
–that we must face the legacy
completely correctly.
d6126ed8288a47d88a6065434b37e5b1
In addition to returning to nature
and the DIY punk spirit–
5c4fc1c7f63440ad8bd19b9b62d98958
–the critical question becomes central
under the 2000s design.
37ffc5a9c7394583a87edd7e3071c3a3
The brochure "Ugly and Beautiful". Points out
that not all design is...
6728a407f81e4d30a4786ff365ffec3d
What is exactly good taste,
and who decides that?
5bdc221101964847b57098feb9cad8f9
The 90s design scene
as I remember it...
c0dce2869c0843d78365a77e994a6a34
The established scenes
were very busy with–
6ca875b069bd4153a720d935fc74117b
–a special history of taste and style
that I didn't recognize.
11bd810669ef4b329f7ed5aa390ec1ec
They talked about quite similar values
and an aesthetic–
6bcc6316e23949c8b192bbfd77524306
–of minimalism, light gray, white
and light wood that was all over.
2982ed94dd5246c6b9a0749dd552e929
In my generation I am the designer
who has received the most criticism.
11650e329ec94c549846fe46f1e6d423
There are few others to whom one has been able
to write everything.
e9d9fc058c5342ce82de9b778fe70f39
It hangs so clearly with
that I myself have said things.
7a5e71782be4495ebd3d24e8de03366c
I put questions
to employees and managers.
6ee8c691e12f4ce093d98353adc63941
I was interested in
that someone would explain to me–
de5be08e97dc4a059b3db4a26c6720ce
–why certain things were considered finer,
more functional and more valuable.
2ef351527712486c8aa0c6c0b939db22
I was interested in what was
noisy, beautiful and sticky–
3de355b705c14f7395ab09eb8266b338
–and that had a little girl room aesthetic.
f79669e6b7bf40b6aa0ba1936c48cb77
My graduation project in 1999,
Beautiful decorative lamps.
bafebdd469d947269acac247cab0490a
And they were made in a technique
where you roll clay–
9de0eaf6362342da94f5987f585d3adc
–and it was a technique
that wasn't considered fine or good–
25336ae0374a4160a1649d9044b2937f
–because it doesn't show ceramic skill, which was important then.
d56829bba41d4f40a1649d9044b07510
Have you made this lamp? –Johan,
is this excellent Swedish design?
4da0d407129b4ebcbe8b28db738c48e7
No, it is not.
e67110c4ae954d2abdbc52f0b60f8e05
With the rolled lamps Zandra Ahl
gives the book "Ugly and Beautiful"–
30e2dd8c75ae4e44b226b5caa03007b8
–where she describes the Nordic style ideal
as anorexia aesthetics.
2d713b0c9d514377a839dd879ac9bb7
She is not the only one questioning
taste and purpose of design.
60e18b5431dd46ea916c5b73690c2d23
Around the turn of the millennium
they become more convinced–
439a9229f2e947cbac77ede51edf2cea
–that the purpose of design
is to ask critical questions.
2f476b1449564060977f64942f5bcc7c
We live in a world that drowns
in things, more now than ever.
3d2455a91ed842d7a3aafaaa34ff436e
And reproduces values about
what should be a good life.
d84c4d6fc32944deab702ebd06bb463f
And then using the form itself
to stop and reflect–
9b536631933d49fc9e7b15b44d9fd299
–is very interesting, and craft
has a special position there.
7d66b965e5ee4a6480d78bcc890b160e
It can be a vase or a pot,
but also a critical pot.
6224a768d13a4de39abd9e15a78ead7e
She wanted to change the world.
No young woman should be ashamed.
678ad7a9369147d19d27186289720cf7
One should not be able to discard aesthetics
and taste. It has been all.
77d3ce8d137a41b29331fea9ae7bfab5
We design the light ourselves.
af1558a0707f4503b0df1567fab8adf6
The difference is
that now we have dynamic elements.
5764505df5a24365ba355e3ed4d087a8
This Nordic...the sunlight.
f197d413323f4bfdb483d635e0f92a4a
One must get it exactly right
for the illusion to work.
30953349611a4c40bb963dcdd36a45c7
–Very nice.
–Thank you.
016fa59978f94dde99c576ed0d16de23
Who has exactly decided that
a lamp must look like a lamp?
2b5e0b720d76471c861167bac2eb471e
And how does it affect humans
different types of light?
4d07bc015744418e86a582d7ef8c61a9
These are the questions
in Daniel Rybakken's design–
f5157fe1afef428890eb2a5f955c5621
–that have led him to create a
lamp that doesn't look like a lamp.
3dc58e7b3b4143d3862d0a502b60fb5c
The project became a lamp that looks
like an abstraction of a blind.
53a47b581133490ba507ea87d184dedf
It is an aluminum plate with a tube,
and then I have worked with the light around–
5a58482806164f72be8a6bc1045d6e80
–that shines out of the lamp's form
on the wall around and on the floor below.
c53dc7a10ea84167bf8391b0150769e5
This actually started with this.
b2d292b5e49b4bcb9f318331d7167519
I began making lamps that gave–
5123c607b1f34f92b70a9eb342c98bd4
–an illusion of direct sunlight
shining in.
d3e61ed9202f48efb3afee5a3dd50dda
The feeling that was created
by having natural sunlight–
c5c7fbc3b0c24f188ee566c3896a841e
–was that one was somehow
part of what is outside the room.
45829371d5ad4714a6132c2c36799d72
When that was changed
to artificial light–
1386365c312943c0877a077d46686ab5
–it was like a prison,
like being locked in a cell.
7029903427b04d7b9dd487c598b683dd
My relationship with light
started when I was little.
9bb94629cc914c7e958d62feab938043
Like many others in the North
I am sensitive to light–
2ae8031f507b4d78938596d71cc0f8c3
–especially when winter comes
with the long dark periods.
ead32e1cf5ad43268783879a509f170b
I began to wonder
why it affected us.
0ccef168e92d49d388cdde6ad6a95e03
Is it just...
20d6c7144cb74631b935026de7fc73b8
...the medical,
or is there something more?
eb492b1a6cb94366b9d1b7adb7263d98
What I saw and began to think was–
218f7d52cc9e4a68ba302fb51eb5f565
–that in a room
where one receives natural sunlight–
deeeebc535484915a5740c41b083789d
–one is somehow
part of what is outside the room.
c7a7ed4a5e3a4e5db499a50ca2c5b960
These reflections become the breakthrough
of Daniel Rybakken as a designer.
85f07834423e42139a068c909a0c1ce2
My first project was called
The subconscious effect of daylight.
e7666c3fb55b4db9aec0d230ddb29e91
It was about
the sunlight coming in.
3f93d8f0820c4cfd9bdf7eadc849cf7
In Sweden they have a good word, "sun cat".
a1ca1bc6fc4046759a25e2fc148d2910
One can project light
from a projector on the floor–
6e76b302d72146b48ae2cf1025789d56
–but where to hide the projector?
70de31c05fdc4a6387140663af51352c
That was my first encounter
with Milan and the fair.
31e1f10432474bb5b7b8646bcdbffc5d
The reactions were really incredible.
e495b3f8f2944151a7586c820e20a659
People in suits lay on the floor
and looked under the table.
cde3fcd0f3a443c0be205d2d8af53580
That was the start of my career.
9432d181f42c434f82df5ebace4d0d78
A lamp in the shape of a sun cat
hits the design world.
b4972d6add1a44c19857ec8a8e1f71d6
But the sun cat is also a critique
of the conservative industry.
79fb5d20bb0a46f3b914044e1f9a60dd
My critique was that we still
designed lamps in the same way.
863867bf0f13467095841d389adc5290
Why did we design lamp shades
without thinking about the light effect?
d15c7de8e45d48e7882f60fdef1a5c58
It was quite conservative.
7a8b5dcc25b74bab817e4f755b869b71
There were different types of lamp:
the hanging, the wall and the work.
55466135efbb4f2bb75da71ff1fc6dbc
At the same time there are examples of people
who have worked more with light.
15dd1268eaca44af93fcc272d4fd45bd
Look at the PH lamps for example.
95ae2fe4da0345f9b0816576e0e9c4f6
It is an elegant thin screen,
but it fulfills a function.
5a14c46571d5412b946fa70d66fa0739
It is about
how light is reflected in the lamp.
b38b842ebaef47609440eede906ae910
We are programmed in the North...
8243457d4ee1409794e3ff9cd04c94ae
...to feel that light is positive.
d05199fb35254c368524046874ffa62b
The lamp as an object has an important role.
89245b8e435e4f5a9af776eab2f5f15a
It is about
having an element–
53cfabada2f246e4ab1e4cdaede31e45
–that perhaps contributes
to a poetic touch.
5b024b80d56b4bd6bb6da6377ac84508
So I think the lamp as an object–
5fc55775fb1544f997be9aeeaa086922
–is something
we will continue to value.
d9214d63c98647c38196aa0a4f088dd9
But not all contemporary designers
have questions–
a89acbda7db349d4b234b23a69e9aefc
–in every object they make.
2f5bc82d0c6c4d82bb65de6aed50499d
I wanted to make a chair
that was just a chair.
94aa59467c0b4b988da5cb3b3b4809c3
Solid and something one dares
to grab hard.
b883ed0757ba42beb24b9caa82a26ef8
When I was offered to design a chair for Svinkløv,
I said: "There are already fine chairs."
0e61ef5d458f4fbfbb9a76914f88ce3f
"We produce already too much
in the world."
f70eddb135c6493da92a661341ce4338
We are producing already too much
here in the world.
0c96c41260344cf9a5b53bf91a05588c
We must begin to think about what we have
around and what we reproduce.
4d08783e07c34a5a922a3aeb2d21573c
It has always been a paradox for me
being in a production industry.
aeeebd7fb5434149be0528f00f7d2407
Chris Halstrøm is traditional–
0b76c5237f2f437392838af8f8ca07a3
–and works side by side
with ancient Nordic masters.
010d0245286b4b8aab6e283f3bfef802
So perhaps it is not strange
that he got the commission–
eda7885a67ee4f3fa98db96ebb3d3f12
–to create a chair for the beloved
century-old spa hotel Svinkløv–
a6820f635387466d9a99b43753219acb
–that was completely destroyed in a fire in 2016.
cfa063c085184fc79eebd795647c8b5d
It was interesting to relate
to a building that no longer existed–
7cc45f859910468f9e9fce47245105cc
–but that had meant so much
to so many.
5bd7613bb41c432d8da660bc516b3f8c
Then we have this handle.
f8f1cd28b1204b53be02ed3fb88275f9
In a restaurant one might want
to pull the chair towards the others–
286214c0c39d413b8a250539e92bda2
–if one ever feels like
being a bit friendly.
41bd044828e0464586a250539e92bda2
Working in the shadow
of the Nordic masters–
619bf133f9424422af5c221d269acf8c
–has never been oppressive
for Chris Halstrøm.
0c13f44d84ae4689b0414367d798e173
I have never thought it was heavy.
20f497ffdfb6421eb0db192d296b8b7c
On the contrary.
It is interesting to see how they did.
07d1ceecfa2846298dd10d2d7e434d8b
Like something Kaare Klint did...
It is called "the father of Danish design".
ec335b5378ab45e1b10dc45816c3df08
He was so meticulous,
and it is inspiring.
1d8df3f3cbac412f8688ca80aa11a0d2
Be meticulous with what you work with.
2a7c1c602fe747c79f7d041d701b7fc1
No matter if you are a furniture designer,
mechanic or air traffic controller.
4c76738a96994dd195fd460c6004840
Be meticulous with what you do.
f3827d512115428eb0fba530afe23856
And meticulous was also
the Finnish designer Alvar Aalto.
51d460bf674546168f3d0648e5916381
I have tattooed the Aaltopöytä
on my arm.
d01b6b5996e246a6b54cf24bc0c530af
It is a good example of
what good design can be.
173d937ee22c4459ab562abceb8a41ab
It is sculptural, functional and durable.
And it does what it should.
dc9b74ebaa1442cd961ba50f46fa4870
In the ancient industrial city Fiskars
in southwestern Finland–
efe5d0bb0a034dcb8d676aeb9542eff3
–iron and steel production has been changed
to design and craftsmanship.
751fb9bd1e68410d91724de6f4faea02
And in a factory where leaf springs for trucks were produced–
b845e905de834578a3d0a13620e8c11b
–birch cast cabinets and wooden mushrooms
are now manufactured.
dcbdfaf37c8b45f1894b97e40e3fda77
It feels natural for me to challenge
the wood. It stands out in many works.
763a8cdf922b4dfea88a0c6ea35bbc88
I want to see how much
I can process the wood...
28823cdea4884a2c809d93d696c4fd8e
...so that it is still reasonable
to work with it–
09ddc47be1ff4a52bc5b4b696ca09944
–and so that it looks
like a natural material.
0567d95748cc4390a38067498505ff05
Antrei Hartikainen's craft follows
the seasons in the Finnish nature.
19fa6c9ecb7c47608dbcd71330c07e69
Among other things the Melt series
twists in different materials.
9d6541ca101442a991e57943f3602ca0
His source of inspiration
is the winter transforming into spring–
a9f9e0c32eca4e738aa083499dc13f24
–when the sun makes the ice melt fast
and water flows underneath.
9d2bd86914204cf68f94f506cbad7e96
The light reflections on the ice surface
are seen in the glass.
cbced044feb5465c879e6cd6ab12340f
It is in the nature around Fiskars–
3a68488e0aef45efb81f63f583d1c1a2
–where Antrei Hartikainen
finds ideas for his design.
678b19e98a1d446b8685c1c8816aa3f8
Light and shadows
filtering between tree trunks–
5296b1fd6bf2440a922cbabb8f509537
–transform in his workshop
into award-winning Finnish design.
bd8ab47151ab42c4a5b3c34689e2a7d9
The inspiration for the Bastone series
came from a walk in the forest.
5d370641f05145e8a30aea559d51d230
One sees old, tall tree trunks...
0bde9bcc989143a3abdbfe3e6a70c3c1
In a forest that has been cared for to some extent–
f3ceb0b67de64d34a1f58d629ff1f3a8
–the sunlight filters through.
4f8a204549524130aac3de5ecdd0ac8e
When the low vegetation is not so high–
47e89201017c453ca5922e8d81b8934e
–the forest atmosphere
filters through some light.
db0047ba861247789e6a30861b192caf
As a teenager Antrei
spent his free time in his father's furniture workshop.
b4eeec4bbb4540a99a8bc481bb282b41
Among tools and different types of wood
his curiosity grew.
da15dcb6dfdc488e9ab9fc3de4de0edf
And when he received a book–
8fd4c0624d304238bcb029d3e3d79bf0
–about the Finnish designer
Tapio Wirkkala, he was hooked.
7d12d707136b4ef2bb50db42b0905b45
Tapio Wirkkala is a person
who has influenced my own work a lot.
c933d4a87c9f49ad9e66b260572d55fc
He always listened attentively to nature–
2b219e256fb747c9cadc2015bd1f1b921
–and was in northern Finland
gathering inspiration–
e8201c02b2054ab283a0f353d23587c6
–from how nature changes
and how seasonal changes affect.
bd11a9f55d2e45e5b706489bb9647511
It plays an important role
also in my own work.
e6e6f6a99a82480da38efeac3cc1c050
Antrei works on the boundary
between art and carpentry.
caa448aa9a0847d3b8edf16321e9699f
The thin mushrooms and flowers
are all hand-carved.
bc95fee58eef42c9a0aabe0b9b491b7e
A laborious work that easily
can end up with the sculpture breaking.
4f8cc277d61f44c19378aec8ca5db619
My work process includes
an element of danger.
2d8b1993d6e94d859f5dd6bfa77687ec
I usually work
quite carefully and step by step.
202b693fe3a7458b87a6a57379048bb8
The wood work is rewarding–
be7e91ff3ce1406d9c807cd9ffafc366
–in that one can
remove a little material at a time.
cfd7370a905744f58a6090606d52fb4b
The sense of the hand is important.
f47b6d3bee2e43678bc123e22b6ca080
One must be able to feel the material and
how much more can be removed from it.
aeef60649ec64f1fafdeba521bc711ed
And then there is the visual element–
5dc6560c288d47f59b7fca3fb85e615a
–which was the original thought.
dbbdfebb045145c48f3505a9252b7fcd
If the seaweed lamp, the stone chair,
the bark vase, the mushroom lamp–
65ae615a9a884c739d1e016d3c5993f8
–or the sunbeams
under the blind–
b8d9c30f473c43b197755b30bf0b078e
–will become collectibles
in the future remains to be seen.
0ef83e7383fd420380f9a9a06ce68b0d
But they are part of a hundred-year story
about Nordic design–
29faf93d87254675a3d877c3e77a792f
–and why it looks the way it does.
d782540faa4645608e8cef822bc461e4
Like the Paimio armchair that makes
tuberculous people breathe freely.
50b183429c6a40fca7d82c9ae1706310
Or the Luxo lamp
with its directed work light.
878f8be64a2045c3abab30f32b147a7b
The Bastu chairs are still pulled out
when political negotiations get stuck.
48e37689b56f4e9bb5b3f16aa3d41db2
And Living Tower
makes conversations reach new heights.
37925bafbd9a49868743fc13e0acce7f
This is a series
about a hundred years of Nordic design–
805de9d27daf4fb4bb912754df3ae720
–and why it looks the way it does.
2b2fbd809ada49dfaa3eb9e316c5ad2d
Translation: B Bäckman,
Y Hellerud, J Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext för SVT
d2dc2aa9212946ae902048ca82871870
Subtitles: Jenny Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext för SVT